# Creating Characters
1. Player Characters (__PCs__) have [six abilities](basic-rules.md?id=abilities): Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intellect, Psyche, and Ego. Each ability has two related values: a __defence__ and a __bonus__. When creating a PC, roll 3d6 for each of their abilities, in order. The lowest of the three dice on each roll is the ability's bonus. Add 10 to find its defence. After you've finished rolling, you may swap the scores of two abilities.  Example: You roll a 2, 2, and 6 for Strength. The lowest die is a 2, so your PC's Strength has a bonus of +2 and a defence of 12. Repeat this process for the rest of the abilities.
2. Choose your [Ancestry](ancestries.md). This determines what type of life-form you are. Each Ancestry has a number of spark tables to give you inspiration for the PC's name, appearance, and personality.
3. Roll 1d8 to determine your PC's starting and maximum hit points (__HP__). A PC's healing rate is 1d8 + Constitution bonus.
4. PCs have a number of [item slots](basic-rules.md?id=item-slots) equal to their Constitution defence, and items they carry must fit into available slots, or the PC will be Encumbered. Most items take up one slot, but some take up more. Small items can be bundled together into a single slot.
5. PCs start with 3 days of rations and one weapon of their player's choice. Roll once on both the Vault Raiding Gear Tables on the Equipment page to determine starting armor and equipment.
   Armor comes with an armor defence value. Note that value on your character sheet with its corresponding Armour bonus (always 10 less than the defence). If the PC is not wearing armour, their armour defence is 10 and their armour bonus is +0.
6. Generate your character's starting Exotica and Gift. Exotica are unusual, rare items. Gifts are supernatural powers.

You are now ready to play!